all right it's
talk all right so instead of giving this
talk tomorrow by the way can everyone
hear me or okay cool uh so instead of
giving this talk tomorrow I'm giving it
today uh I'm going to be sharing a
little bit about something I have been
thinking quite a bit about for last few
months which is what Python's future jit
compiler might look like or see Python's
uh future jit compiler specifically um
so I'm going to start with some
background and this kind of um will also
be good background for Ken's talk
immediately after this on uh
optimizations that we hope to perform uh
specifically I'm mostly going to be uh
kind of talking about some experiments
that I've done with actually generating
and executing machine code um not
necessarily optimizations and things
that happen in the meantime however I
will be giving some background on that
because I think it's really helpful for
understanding how everything ties
together um so a little recent history
in cpython
3.11 uh one of the headline features was
the specializing adaptive interpreter um
and so this delivered uh really good
speedups I think the number we quoted
most widely was something like 25% um if
you want to take that at face value that
it was just a one-time performance gain
um that was nice to have then sure but
if if you think about it and you read a
little bit between the lines you
understand that we're now collecting
runtime profiling data for uh user code
and that's something that we can use
later if we want to lower that code and
make it more statically
typed in cpython 3.12 um we got a nice
quality of life Improvement as
maintainers uh we started generating The
Interpreter cases the main switch from a
domain specific language um and this
allowed us to like an analyze and modify
uh parts of The Interpreter at build
time um this is really helpful for the
people actually working on the bite code
because we can uh uh worry less about
things like uh error handling reference
counts uh uh adding uh counters and
stats and all those sorts of things um
but at the same time again if you can
kind of read between the lines uh we now
are able to generate multiple
interpreters um from a single source of
Truth um and we also are able to
generate lots of metadata uh by
analyzing that single source of
Truth so in
313 um and again this is all stuff
that's actually currently on Main um we
do have an internal pipeline for
detecting optimizing and executing hot
code paths so this is off by default but
if you build Python and you set the
right environment variable or pass the
right X option it's called uops
uops Uh basically cpython will uh find
hot Loops in your codee it will
basically uh build a trace of that Loop
and it will break it up into uh a more
efficient
representation and uh optimize it do
some light optimization and execute it
in a second interpreter now currently
this is actually a little bit slower so
you don't want to turn it on it's like a
five or six% slower just because it's
kind of the first phase of this entire
pipeline um and in the end The
Interpreter isn't really what we want to
be executing these things I'll get to
that later um but basically this
wouldn't be possible without either of
the first two steps um being able to
break uh big complicated bite code
instructions down into more simple
Atomic steps is only possible because of
the changes made in uh 3.11 for
specialization and in 3.12 where we're
able to Define uh uh bite code
instructions in terms of smaller
steps so I like uh providing examples
just so we can kind of walk through what
this pipeline looks like in practice and
what it may look like in the future so
we're going to look at my Fibonacci
function here um it's pretty
straightforward and specifically we're
going to focus on the inner loop um it's
pretty simple we're just looping over
the range and then we update the values
for A and B by adding A and B
together uh so if you look at the bite
code for this function it'll look
something like this um uh you
know if you want to know how the bite
code works you can look at the disc
documentation um but basically these are
generic instructions um that have mostly
remained unchanged since the earliest
versions of
python um however in 311 we got our
specialized bite code um so that took
generic operations like for iter and
binary up and allowed us to specialize
those at runtime for example for
iterating over a range object or adding
two integers
together um so that's great um now in
313 we're building micro op traces and
so these Micro Ops are those smaller
more Atomic steps that I was talking
about that we're able to break
individual instructions uh up into um so
as I mentioned before you can actually
run these things off of Main by passing
The X option uops um and when you do
that we will collect a trace for this
Loop and we'll actually break each of
these instructions up into uh their
individual components so you can see
that for some of the simpler
instructions uh in they may only expand
to uh two Micro Ops and that's what we
call them Micro Ops um but the more
complicated ones like for it range or um
the integer addition may have several
different parts um and what's nice about
breaking those parts up is that if any
of the parts are redundant for example
if we're checking that something's an
integer when we can actually prove that
it's an integer then we can remove it um
or if we want to move things around
that's an option as
well uh so another thing that uh 313
Maine will currently do for you is we'll
do some light optimization on these
Micro Ops um So currently the only
optimization we perform is we'll find a
redundant frame pointer updates
basically if we have an operation that
cannot fail or the control flow cannot
move uh to any other point in the
program there's no reason for us to
update the frame and say oh we're
currently executing this instruction um
so it's a very very simple optimization
but it does work as a nice proof of
concept and so um we will actually
identify these four or set IP
instructions and uh just remove them for
you so that's just pure overhead that uh
we're able to
remove in the future and Ken will talk a
little bit more about this we'll be able
to do uh Stronger optimizations uh where
we're able to remove more expensive
checks so for instance if we can
statically prove as we can in the case
of this function that for example we're
always iterating over a range object
once we've entered this Loop and that uh
A and B are both integers once we've
entered this Loop then we can also
remove those as well and what's left is
basically the bare minimum amount of
work required to uh actually execute
this hot Inner Loop and you'll notice
that this is entirely statically typed
which is great for further
lowering so um once we've removed all of
that kind of extra stuff that we can
prove we don't actually need then comes
just in time compilation and that's kind
of what I'm going to spend the rest of
this uh time talking
about um we have a couple different
goals with the Justin Time compilation
so um our main overarching goal is to
remove interpretive overhead so we have
removed all the extra sort of uh Dynamic
work that needs to take place um but
there's still a lot of other kind of
overhead that just comes from the way
the uh virtual machine is laid out and
the way it interacts with data um so we
want to remove interpretive overhead by
statically compiling these optimized
traces um and statically compiling them
allows to us to reduce indirection um
through a few different ways first of
all we can burn in uh basically uh
encode directly into the machine code
the values of constants caches and uh
arguments to instructions so basically
uh instead of decoding uh in
instructions uh opar every single time
we execute that instruction we can
instead for example make it an immediate
value to uh an instruction in actual
machine code um which uh repl is a
memory load is a lot more Compact and a
lot more
efficient um we can also do things like
moving data off of frames and into
registers so the Micro Ops still execute
on a python frame which means that
intermediate values that live on the
value stack are all still being written
to memory and read from memory um so if
we can lift all of that stuff out of
memory and into actual Hardware
registers um that saves a lot of traffic
uh to and from uh main memory which is
always a good thing um finally we can
bring hot code paths in line so instead
of having a uh large interpreter where
we have all of these different cases uh
that all need to be present because we
can jump into them at any time um here
we can make a straight line code path
that executes exactly those instructions
that I showed on the previous
slide now these need to be weighed
against some like practical goals right
like I I don't think anyone wants me to
dump like a 10,000 line C++ jit on us
right so uh the first thing is Broad
platform support python runs lots of
places and arjit should too um I think
that this is an ambitious goal but it's
an important one uh I think that uh it
should have few runtime dependencies for
example I would like for this jit to be
in a place where uh for example users
wouldn't need to have a full lovm
install for example um I don't think
that's a good user experience it can
maybe be made into a good user
experience but I think I'd rather start
from a place where you just download
python the same way as you always have
and everything just
works um and finally and perhaps most
importantly to me uh low implementation
complexity um see python is
overwhelmingly maintained by volunteers
um and so I think that uh being able to
keep the complexity down uh is a really
really important goal to keep in mind in
fact um I personally feel like it's
worth sacrificing Peak Performance in
order to keep the implementation as
simple easy to maintain and easy to
understand and teach and learn as
possible um and so these are competing
goals right like we want to make things
fast but we're also willing to as I said
sacrifice Peak Performance to make sure
that you know this is something that we
can all uh understand and that we can
all maintain for the Long
Haul so uh one kind of uh recent
development uh in jit compiler
technology is something called copy and
Patch compilation and it actually
fulfills many of these goals in a really
satisfying way um so if you haven't
heard about it which you know I hadn't
heard about it that long ago um copy and
Patch compilation comes out of a
Stanford paper um but if you don't like
reading the paper I highly recommend the
uh blog post there's a blog post called
building a baseline jit for Lua
automatically this is by the same author
as the paper and I've actually spoken
with him on a couple occasions um
basically this is a way of uh turning a
c interpreter into a fast template jip
compiler um and what's really really
nice is that we are able to maintain
that single source of Truth for how B
code instruction should be implemented
it doesn't require us to hand write
assembly which means that if you want to
fix a bug in The Interpreter and you
already know how to fix bugs in The
Interpreter the jib will be fixed too
without you having to actually do
anything we have that one source of
Truth and everything's built
automatically for you but the jit itself
is still really fast and has good
quality code um if you don't believe me
here are some numbers from the paper
compared to a web assembly Baseline
compiler um copy and Patch has five
times faster code generation and 50%
faster code overall the code quality is
really good and I'll show you why in a
second um compared to a mid-tier
compiler uh like a traditional J tool
tool chain which would be lvm with a low
optimization level to keep things fast
um it has 100 times faster code
generation and still 15% faster code and
just to kind of complete the numbers uh
compared to a full optimizing jit with
handwritten assembly so in this case L
jit um a copy and Patch low
implementation it's still faster on some
benchmarks and it's only 35% slower
overall despite being much much simpler
to
maintain so how does it work well
let's think about um the kind of
simplest form of a template jit compiler
if we want to compile uh sequence of
bite code instructions to machine code
as fast as possible at runtime what it
might look like is walking over that
sequence of bite code instructions and
then for each one copying over some
static pre-compiled machine code into
executable memory and then going through
that machine code and patching up
instructions that need to have runtime
data encoded in them um so these would
the be things like op bars uh constants
that we want to burn in things like
that now if you look at these two
requirements um you'll notice that this
sounds a lot like something we already
have which are relocatable object files
so uh I could just as easily say when
linking or loading an elf file we want
to copy some static pre-compiled machine
code into executable memory and then we
want to patch up the instructions that
need to have run some data encoded in
them these are relocations for like X
turn
symbols and so this is how copy and P
Works um basically we uh will use llvm
to build an elf object file and then we
parse out the stuff that we care about
from that elf object file namely the
body of the bite code instruction and
any information on how we need to fix up
the stuff that we want to fix out so I'm
going to give you a concrete example and
by concrete I mean I'm glossing over
some details so take everything at like
80% face value okay so uh we have a load
fast instruction here um we are going to
take the body of that load fast
instruction we're going to put it inside
of some other code that is going to be
sort of the scaffolding that we need to
be able to extract the stuff that we
care about later and be able to stitch
everything together so in this example
we are going to be burning in the opar
and we are going to be basically jumping
into the next bite code instruction
because we need to make sure that the
code is laid out in a way that we can
flow from one instruction to the next
and that lbm will like move things
around on us um so see here I have sort
of um some placeholders here uh some uh
things that I don't Define for magically
inserting the op AR and magically
continuing
execution uh copy and Patch solves this
problem by using xterms so uh instead of
uh using the value of the X turn for our
off Ark we use the address of the X turn
for our off Ark which allows uh lvm to
generate really efficient code that we
can patch very very easily when you're
actually fixing up relocations typically
you're inserting the address of the
extern into the uh relocatable code and
so with this we don't actually need to
dreference the value at that address we
can just use the address directly and so
the code is really efficient um and
since we're using clang we have this
beautiful must tail attribute on the
final continuation call which means that
we will just get a single jump um that
we can use to flow into the next op code
and even better if the next uh if that
junp happens to be a l zero we can just
skip the jump
entirely so the object file that we get
out of this when we compile this to elf
looks a lot like this and we have
everything we care about we have the
machine code here highlighted in blue
and we have the relocations and where
their uh data is going to go we know
exactly how the data is going to be
patched and we know exactly where it's
going to be and so we can take this
parse it out and put it in static header
files and now we have all the data that
we want to copy and then all the holes
that we want to
patch um so uh I've been working on this
for a couple months uh and I've done
this so if you want to check it out it's
on my Fork of cpython uh the branch name
is Justin as in Justin time so uh if you
want to check it out it works um you can
also just like actually look at The Code
by uh going to uh ghub and uh check out
my Branch
there um just some kind of stats on the
implement ation itself um at build time
it is about 700 lines of complex python
um so this is python code that handles
uh actually extracting all the cases
compiling each one parsing out the elf
and then generating the header files um
it has about 100 lines of complex c
those are the templates that I showed
you that we actually insert the cases
into so that we can comp compile and
extract them um and there is an lovm
dependency but most importantly this is
a fill time dependency not something
that users need to install um compare
this to the uh runtime requirements um
so we have 300 lines of simple C again
the nice thing about the copy and Patch
compiler is that it's really fast but
it's also really simple it's a mem copy
and then walking over the relocations
and just performing them um and then we
have the 3,000 lines of simple generated
C and it truly is just as simple as the
code that I showed you on the last
slide um and most importantly no runtime
dependencies everything is full fully
self-contained um and what I really like
about this is that uh from a maintainer
point of view I like that uh all the
complexity has been shifted to build
time rather than run time and it's been
shifted into python code rather than C
code um so we are able to do all of the
kind of fancy stuff later when we
actually start making this thing really
really fast and really really performant
and optimizing the code um in the python
code itself um rather than doing most of
that work at runtime and in uh C code I
think we can all agree that we prefer
writing python to C yeah PA did you have
a question yeah so I'm curious why you
need L dependency
like you want to generate the
object it into it put into templates but
you just use whatever compiler you're
using to compile python to just compile
maybe this templ and as far as they
below yeah so there yeah there are a
couple reasons so the first one is that
must tail attribute where we get
guaranteed tail calls GC GCC doesn't
have that and we need tail calls for
correctness otherwise we'll blow the
stack stud every
comp exactly clang is a great cross
compiler so it it works lots of places
um and we also use some other LM tools
for example we don't actually parse the
elf um LM has a tool that will dump El
elf to Json which is great oh so we
actually just parse the Json which is
beautiful um it also has uh you know a
built-in disassembler so uh the 3,000
lines of header file is actually
annotated where each above each kind of
dump of the assembly um we actually have
the human readable assembly output as
well that you can audit and look at um
and another thing too is uh once we
start getting really clever with this uh
there are actually really cool things
that you can do by using lm's uh like
wide VAR iy of calling conventions um so
for example they have calling
conventions that pass all arguments in
registers and have no call E saved
registers which is ideal if you want to
like pin stack items in registers and uh
make the jump at the very end of the
continuation really really
clean yes separate question um the bill
time dependency is that bill time or is
it generate files time could we separate
that out could for python releases yes
yeah the only thing we're using L LM for
is to generate one header file um So
currently on my Branch that's not
checked into the rapo because it's
platform specific and even whatever your
pie config looks like it can change the
way it works okay so it does need to be
built yeah we could choose to check
those in or host those somewhere or
whatever um well if it's if it's
configured specific yeah then you can't
check them in yeah yeah it it I I choose
not to track it um you know uh
yeah so it is it is it is technically
generate files time but it's not checked
in so it's built time effectively well
yeah it it also I mean all the other
generated files we have are platform
agnostic yes yeah yeah I I understand
the question now yes it's build time
okay yeah you put it in a container like
the thing that we using for configure so
everyone can run the commands and get
the same out no because it depends on
the platform so you would need need a
container for every you would need a
container for your specific platform it
would be for every platform every option
of whether you have a search turned on
or off debug turned on or off by the way
you can put asserts and printfs and
stuff inside of your cases and they'll
just be in the assembly it's
awesome how long does it take a build
time again it depends you have one of
the new Macs because it takes like 30
seconds on on slower machines it's less
than a minute um and it doesn't uh
always rerun so for example I have it
cached so that it won't regenerate if
the file's already present and the
generated cases haven't changed so in
practice if you're not modifying The
Interpreter you won't see it but um
otherwise it takes a few seconds on Fast
hardware and no more than a minute on
everything
else so do windows oh let's talk about
support Victor you will be happy to know
that the the uh the initial
implementation supports two platforms it
windows Micosoft just
kidding it supports all tier one
platforms if you check it out right now
on any of these it'll work in fact it
supports all tier one and tier 2
platforms right now um except power PC
but we don't talk about
that um but uh most notably since clang
is such a great cross compiler uh the
default cross compile setup just works
perfectly um if you're doing cross
compiles now don't change anything just
install lbm 16 nearby um and your
regular build your cross build whatever
options you're passing to configure
things just
work and I think that's it so no
you uh sorry
Victor did you have a question okay yeah
no I was to say how does it compare to
number does it work with gpus uh how
does it to compare in terms of speed
yeah uh So currently it is no faster
than main when you have this turned on
but that represents a 5% improvement
over the Micro Ops that it's based on um
and we haven't done any of the fun
tricks yet okay um so it's much slower
than number um and what was the other
question number a GPU support GPU
support I would guess just as well as LM
supports gpus so I I have I'm not doing
anything special yeah they aren CPUs
resources AR in the right place so it's
we yeah it's nice because for things
like platform support or more specific
like Hardware integration we can just
piggy back on LM so if there's a way to
make lbm uh use the gpus more
effectively then we can harness that too
at least for that build yes okay
yeah Victor the thing about container is
theats you don't you don't need the
container so if you install the cross
compiler tool chain um LM knows how to
find that and you can just build them
all because you you don't actually need
to run anything for this he really wants
to use a
container when you ask people to install
LM they get different flavor different
FL and output can
change config to put everything in
container we know that you always get
exactly the same yeah we that is
definitely something important but again
remember this also depends on configure
flag so it's only as stable as those um
also on top of that I I mean I have test
I do have CI running this on all the
platforms I listed there um and uh it's
also tested against the full Matrix of
LM 14 15 and 16 so for all three of
those um I've verified that this passes
the entire test
Suite so are you going to checking
this I have no plans
to we
should you can host a bunch of them
want like I'm not sure we're going to
need a container basically it sounds
like this is working on things
syst get yeah and if you
checking problem for people building
and yeah people in this room probably
not and if you check out my Branch too
uh there's a read me in tools jit um it
tells you how to install lvm on all
platforms and again one thing I want to
highlight is you don't need to build
cpython itself with lovm or even the
same version of lovm lovm is only used
for just for generating that one header
file um so when you get a t of python
you don't need LM so it would be
yes if if you want to build the jit yes
um so I imagine this behind a configure
flag um where I mean just just
spitballing here um if you don't pass
the configure flag and you don't have
lovm installed um we don't do we just do
a normal build if we smell that lovm is
nearby but you didn't pass the flag we
can say hey by the way you can build a
jit if you want to and if you do pass
the flag then we build the
jit you can also leave work for fure of
comp just just that making that configur
flag an optional thing is pretty much
Essential for iOS because or or like web
assembly for example or any of the list
of tier three platforms that we
absolutely can't build for
yeah uh public sorry I should say names
do you need any special
like for mic like call that they has
some protections
like this is I mean jits work on Mac OS
so you can't have you can't have
writable executable memory and I think
as of Sonoma you can't have readable
executable memory um which is something
I need to fix so this won't work on
somoma because currently the memory is
read execute but that's on my list of
things to fix like do we need to like to
change like the way we need to release
this for like I I recall that there's a
way to ask for it
say when you map the memory you ask for
the jit uh in the flags when you map the
memory you can say map jit I think yeah
yeah and that says I'm AIT I I think you
may be referring to platform
restrictions where you need to actually
set the exe up speci before you even run
it let me let me ref so when we the
mic because I supp one that you compile
is the same you compile right we need to
like do you know if we need to set
anything or ask if we do I don't know
that we need to I'm not familiar with
how we're actually building Mac OS
releases differently from how I just
build it locally um I can vouch for it
working
locally presumably the the release
manager needs to use that flag yes if
there's anything that needs to be done
that sounds like the release manager
should do it but I'm not aware of yeah
it it very well could be the most the
most of the sort of permissions stuff
I've had to debug has been on Mac OS
specifically M1 Mac
yeah so it sounds like the Run
generation is super fast yes why not
just do this either for like tier one or
I what number starts at interpret why
only do this for tier two well we don't
definitely don't want to do it for
unspecialized bik code right because the
specialized B code is uh where we're
able to actually generate high quality
code for um and the reason that we want
to break it up into tier 2 code is
because just by breaking it up we're not
actually gaining anything right um if
anything we're losing something because
lvm is able to optimize less over the
same context um but uh the kind of
reason to build this on top of tier two
is because ideally we're going to
optimiz here to and Ken Jen will talk a
little bit more about that um but if
we're able to remove guards or reorder
things or hoist guards or whatever um
then this Builds on top of that um and
so those guards won't be present in the
generated machine code I get all that
but like so the examples you're talking
about that are already using this are
using this for their Baseline right
they're using this before any
optimizations yes so wouldn't this be
advantageous in the same use case for
python it could be I haven't tried
it we we currently can't translate every
tier one by code corresonding sequence
of tier two by codes although we have
translate every tier one by code to copy
and Patch no
because needs to
be simp we we we could it would just be
different
ahead although have and we want
effective profiling that gives us as
well so theer
oneu because we're effectively
probably another thing too I I realized
I didn't mention um the reason that the
generated code is such high quality is
because we don't care about uh like the
compil times when we're actually
building this thing so we pull out all
the stops and tell lvm to optimize
heavily um which is something you
wouldn't want to do in a RI time jit yes
when youate the machine
code can you pass the equivalent to
compile we're using
clim yes yeah so uh we uh compile first
using clang and that turns C code into
llvm uh textual IR um the only reason we
do that is because we want to fix up the
calling convention and clang doesn't
actually let let us have this calling
convention from C so we fix up the
calling convention using a hacky Rex
replacement that will change in the
future um and uh and then compile again
elf and you said it was under your or
yeah yeah so my user brand Booker it's
on my fory python the brand it's on the
yes uh that's the
URL so it's the Justin branch of Bry P
that's if you go to uh tools jit there's
a read me in there that says how to
install lvm
sweet it's one a question of the general
approach than the what you need so far
but once you have a line of tra and you
can have individual with this function
another obvious things to try is to put
all these calls into a cile compile it
all together and see what happens yeah
have you tried uh no but one thing the
paper did have good success with is
actually compiling super instructions uh
for common pairs or triples because then
it really allows lbm to optimize across
um especially for for example like
obvious things that we may want to look
at are um when we so the Micro Ops are
kind of expanded from a single
instruction um I would imagine that in
many cases we aren't able to optimize
that very heavily and so it ends up
being the equivalent of the original
instruction so that'd be sort of low
hanging fruit for things that we could
compile and again when we're just
walking over we can window over and see
if we have anything that's entire
X involve the compiler
and exactly and and right now we have um
like we have one uh template for every
uh micro op so like 200 some odd
templates um in the paper they generated
as many as like 10,000 um combinations
yes not only for combinations but also
like for example if you have uh some
instructions for example um CH the
control flow changes based on the value
of the opar so it may make sense to
actually burn in values of the opar not
actually at jit time but ahead of time
where you hard code those values and LM
can optimize based on them and the op AR
is completely removed um then there's
also super instructions and there
there's all sorts of games you can play
um another example would be if you're
lifting things from uh stack items into
registers um if you are kind of keeping
that mapping of Stack items to registers
you may want to compile variants for
different stack sizes um so that you
have a finite number of uh mappings but
simple Victor again so what is your
proposal do you want to to match or do
mainside uh I I didn't really have a
proposal today but basically if this is
something people would like to see in
main off by default um we can get it in
main very easily I know we aren't crazy
about experiments in Maine which is kind
of why I'm floating the idea now if not
uh this has been a long live Branch
since like May um and so if if if it's
any Testament to like how easy it is to
maintain this stuff a lot of stuff has
landed in Maine since May and uh keeping
this Branch up to date and improving
during that time has not been very
difficult um Ken even borrowed uh he
basically merged this Branch into his
own Branch a while back when he was uh
uh playing around with optimizing stuff
and wanted to see what would happen if
he jitted it Ken is it easy to like add
new bite codes and work with the jit as
a like a API this is a r question about
yes
um yeah the good thing is that you just
need to install LM
and uh the the script will automatically
generate so you don't actually need to
know how it works in the background yeah
oh and because like you said at one time
patching in is really simple so we
actually had to modify the patching
because our patches were of different
types than L tracers but even then like
the file is just a for Lo like you
mentioned copy so really simple to
multiply yeah the actual code that jits
and copies and patches like of those 300
lines of Fairly uh simple c um like the
the hot Loop where we're actually just
walking over stuff selecting stencils
and patching stuff is like maybe 20
lines of code um the rest is sort of
like handling permissions on Windows and
Mac and all that kind of fun is it
possible to to maintain it outside
python I mean just technically
sense or is it is
implementation of I would say that since
we are using the same Micro Ops as tier
2 um we're pretty tightly coupled to the
implementation
[Music]
um um it could
be um one thing that we would need so so
when we actually uh compile the code um
we basically in those header files if
you have a bite code instruction that
calls for example p number ad right
that's a symbol that you need to link
against um and so the way we do that in
the header file is we actually just put
address of p number ad as an addend for
that uh
relocation um that works for p number ad
but if we were building this separately
from cpython itself there's a lot of
internal apis that would need to be
exposed as public symbols in order for
us to link them and actually linking
them at run time would be a lot more
complicated um we would first probably
need to initialize all the stencils when
the extension or whatever was first
loaded by walking over and uh the
stencils and actually resolving all of
those symbols finding them in the
current process uh with using dlm or
whatever the windows equivalent is
walking over them and actually fixing up
those add-ins and then it would mostly
be the same um but that sounds a lot
more complicated than and I don't think
we want to stick all that stuff as
public symbols um so it is doable in
theory I think the ergonomics make it
like probably not the best option I'm
examp
okay don't build
the or or I'll build it for you and I'll
that's behind the configur flag for now
the answer to
that unknown this very useful find way
forward to actually do it you you can't
at the same time say that you want the
jit and say that you
cannot have this dependency right this
want I want million we can we all want
things I get
it y did you have your hand up yeah so
as far as I understand there's pretty
much no alternative to this like if you
want to go with the it's either us
spending a lot of resources handwriting
uh handwriting all of this kind of code
pass generating them uh which is one of
the hardest parts of the gy like this is
a nice to a lot of
resour it seems like the plan should be
main am
I no that's how I feel as well um and
and another thing too just since you
mentioned handwriting assembly is that
the two are not mutually exclusive so
for example if we see that there's a
really common op code and we see that we
can actually write better than LM can
for whatever reason we can do that the
the two play very nicely together so it
just be in that build script uh the 700
lines of python or whatever we just
special case that off code and say hey
use this assembly file instead yeah Qui
question P question on the on the
Benchmark numbers that you show one of
the slid so basically what they did they
just repl so for example in the case of
compil they just replaced the G uh Cod
assembly and what not where the stop
this
appro no it was a completely uh like new
implementation that they wrote so if you
go to the blog post that I linked to
earlier um it's a nice long blog post if
you don't know anything about jits
you'll know how jits work after reading
it um and it goes over copy and patch
and also things like inline caching and
whatever but it's basically him
implementing a Lua uh jit okay right and
and so it's the so that yeah yeah so so
it's it's the comparison of his just
from scratch implementation versus an
established fast
implementation what is that I can put it
back up
there you could probably find it just by
Google for a c yeah if you if you if you
search for oh wait did I skip it already
hang on I never saw the link to the blog
post uh it was underneath the paper it's
right
here you haven't linked the che that yes
I should indeed so the uh the top one is
the paper the bottom one is the blog
post and I just posted they did a
presentation a few months ago as well
was that for the paper good slides yeah
and just as an
FYI like that may be a new paper but we
were doing this type of approach for a
translator transmeta 20 years ago and I
doubt we were the this but templates
from regular yeah are very fast to yeah
how was your experience with it I sh in
intermediate yeah I mean it is I kind of
view this as a like a baseline but a
really good one yeah right and so if we
wanted to have another tier where we
pull out all the stops on top of this
that's a bridge we could cross right
this is easy to maintain you don't have
was another question in terms of the Cod
style will will you need to change a lot
like I know that you compile some of the
functions already but will the Cod style
same when you say the code style so we
extract so basically the way you write
code py code
yes I'm I'm sure you'll see lots of blog
posts of how to get the most out of C
Python's new jit you know but those are
yeah I I don't think it'll be any
different than the specializing
interpreter where it's just we play to
the benchmarks the benchmarks we take to
be somewhat realistic and we look to
confirm that that is true in practice
right um and I'm sure that there are
people who you know like try to optimize
for the specializing interpreter and I'm
sure there'll be people who try to
optimize for this but I think in general
it'll just be a good low overhead way of
world we already I want everyone discuss
so what is theing situation of this like
for one of
to yeah um so I don't know enough about
unwind tables and that and like dwarf
and all of that to give a good answer I
can tell you that I don't include any
unwind tables or dwarf in the jitted
code and we disable frame pointers but
if it's it's something that could be
reused from the original elf um then
that's something that would be easy to
harvest uh otherwise we would have to
kind of emit it ourselves when way will
be maybe to May at the beginning when I
mean at the beginning maybe when we are
playing with maybe a che way is to allow
at least to or detect if you're building
python itself with frame pointers and
then generating the template with frame
pointers yeah I assume going to copy
one yeah so we're disabling frame
pointers right now just because we're
passing argument registers and that's a
valuable register um but I mean this
argument's been had a million times so
we can build with frame pointers you
know it's easy enough just to say don't
use that register right um and so that
could be the first step and then again I
I would need to do more research if I
were to do it myself well at least
having aouch I think a first kind of
line
cheap useful in you
side yeah if we were extract like if we
could just extract all of this stuff
from the elf file is that something that
could be reused or would need to be
different every time we emit a copy of
that stencil you would need toch the
relocations as well so there's
relocations in the like the unwind
tables and stuff the has like what is
called and those will change when you
place the code in different places so
you need to somehow say oh this this
code now Lees here so you need to say
address things but most of the Annoying
stuff to generate you can just copy okay
yeah if it's if it's anything like the
mechanics of extracting like for example
static data BSS data executable text and
processing relocations on those then the
mechanics are almost identical it sounds
like depends on
how it to retri it from the file but if
very easy and have some outut I suppose
yeah like not like something that I
think is super super important yeah two
flags that I passed to clang currently
are omit frame pointer and no
asynchronous on wine tables um so if if
we if if that's the sort of stuff that
just gets dumped in the AL file and is
reusable then it sounds like we have a
promising path forward for a good
debugging
lot oh I didn't see I think we're
getting too much into implementation